INTRODUCTIONThe era of antibiotics started in 1940 with the introduction of penicillin [1]. The infections that use to cause millions of deaths started to seem a minor problem that could be fought with this new tool. But abuse and lack of control of antibiotic usage, together with the ability of bacteria to rapidly adapt and evolve is threatening humanity with the possibility of re-entering an era of non-treatable infections: the era of resistant superbugs. Soon, many infections that would once be easily treated will no longer are curable with current antimicrobials used in regular doses. Super-resistant bacteria are not just nosocomially acquired [2,3], they can also be found in the community [4], this exposes several classes of individuals to a high risk; children, elderly, patients with chronic diseases and those with immune disorders. The origins of increasing antibiotic resistance are diverse, selfmedication, poor adhesion to treatment programme, increased usage of antibiotics in livestock as a growth promoter, to name but a few [4,5]. In the report of, Ears-Net 2013, the “European antibiotic resistance surveillance network” [6], established that antibiotic resistance and other infectious disease treatments, are the cause of substantial problems in health, not just in developing countries, but also developed countries, due to the increases of expense in patient care, failure of treatment and in the worst case scenario, the death of the patient. The increase in the usage of broad spectrum antibiotic has several consequences; for example, in a hospital in the U.S.A. [7] there was a large outbreak of infections caused by ESBLproducing pathogens in the early 1990s, cephalosporin usage was reduced 80% throughout the hospital, accompanied by a 71% reduction in ceftazidime resistant Klebsiella spp. in the ICU. Still the damage was that overuse of carbapenems resulted in a 69% increase in imipenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacterbaumanii [8]. Nowadays the controversy between the in vitro laboratory results and what to report for treatment are important as CLSI and EUCAST trying to control the problem of increasing antibiotic resistance, suggest in their formatives reporting Extended Spectrum Beta-Lactamases (ESBLs) producers ‘as found’ rather than resistant to all cephalosporins. This can bring terrible consequences as the treatment failure rate might increase and the number of ESBLs producers can increase due to the lack of using the right treatment [9]. There are variants that arise by spontaneous mutation in inducible strains, and the likelihood of their selection during therapy, with consequent treatment failure, is as high as 20- 30% when third-generation cephalosporin are used to treat an Enterobacter spp. bacteraemia; the mortality rate is 50% and a substantial increase in cost is incurred attempting successful treatment and patient survive. Some studies have shown that the Escherichia coli living in the gut are ESBLs producers in 40% of total tested isolated, increasing the chance of a serious infection and dramatic cost increase. Finally the number of patients that are infected by strains producing carbapenemases is dramatically increasing, of which the mortality rate is higher than 50% [10].Evolving mechanisms of resistance in Superbugs Beta-lactamases: Beta-lactamases are enzymes that canhydrolase the antibiotic. They are classified into four different groups according to Bush, Jacoby and Medeiros’ classification [11].Class A: Most of these enzymes hydrolyse oxyiminocephalosporins.They have serine in the active site; they are inhibited by clavulanic acid, and other similar inhibitors. In this group are the Extended Spectrum Beta-Lactamases, known as ESBLs. ESBLs are one of the most frequent mechanisms of resistance in enterobacteriaceae bacteria and they are classified into several groups according to their amino-acid sequence homology. TEM-1 was described in the early 1960s [12], today the prevalence of this type of resistance and the quantity of variants is alarmingly high. Concern over the frequency of isolates with ESBL enzymes has naturally been on the increased, but now isolates are not just resistant to third generation cephalosporins but as well carbapenems.Class B: These are metallo-enzymes that harbour a Zn2+ in the active site, these enzymes hydrolyses most of the beta-lactams including carbapenems and they are not inhibited by classical inhibitors (like clavulanic acid) but they are by Ethylene diaminetetra acetic acid (EDTA).Class C: They have a serine in the active site and they are known as cephalosporinases. They have some resistance to classical inhibitors and they are found in the chromosome of most enterobacteriaceae.Class D: They have a serine in the active centre. High ability to hydrolizeoxacillin, cloxacillin and methicillin and they are not inhibited by clavulanic acid. Today, over 890 unique ?-lactamases have been identified in naturally occurring bacterial isolates [8] Efflux pumps: This system is an active system of expulsion of the antibiotic. It uses transmembrane proteins that eject the antibiotic outside the cell, regardless of the concentration gradient [13,14]. Efflux pumps are important mechanisms not justfor resistance; they play a crucial role in bacterial communication (known as quorum sensing) among other biological processes.Nanoshuttles and coating systems for infection controlTrying to look for new solution, nanotechnology is developing different tools, new therapies to control and combat infections. With reference to bacterial resistance, nanotechnology offers a solution in form of nanoshuttles that can deliver antibiotics to a precise location and release them progressively at a controlled rate. These systems are showing real promise and preliminary results show how the concentration of the drug needed to kill the microorganisms is lower than in the normal conditions. An additional advantage is that the risk of inadvertently creating resistance in other present strains is diminished. Antibiotic target Antibiotic family Cellular Wall Beta-lactams and vancomicin Synthesis DNA/RNA Fluoroquinolones, Rifamicin Synthesis folato Trimetropin, Sulfonamides Cellular membrane Daptomicin, Polimixin Protein synthesis Linezolid, Tetraciclins, Macrolides, Aminoglicosides Table 1: Mechanisms of action of the most frequently used family of antibiotics. Mechanism of resistance Antibiotic family Efflux pumps Fluoroquinolones, Aminoglicosides, Tetraciclin, Beta-lactams, Macrolides Inmunity and Bypass Tetraciclines, Trimetropin, Sulfonamides Modification of the target Fluoroquinolones, Rifamicin, Vancomicin, Penicilin, Macrolides, Aminoglicosides Inactivation of the antibiotic by enzymes Beta-lactams, aminoglicosides, Macrolides, Rifamicin Table 2: Mechanisms of resistance of the different antibiotic families. Central Cartelle et al. (2014) Email: JSM Chem 2(2): 1011 (2014) 3/5 Nanotechnology is also making great progress in combatting biofilms on medical devices; many have been successfully coated with nanoparticles that inhibit biofilm formation. Most studies have been focused on pathogens that are frequently associated with nosocomial infections. In this review we will explore the advances in nanotechnology, novel treatment systems and new coating systems that can prevent bacterial infections and colonisations.CONCLUSIONSIn the XXI century nanotechnology brings new hope in the fight against infections. Shuttle drug delivery systems and coated medical devices are giving highly promising preliminary results. The evolution of this technology is occurring fast and is a new hope for keeping us in the race against antibiotic resistance. Hopefully soon we will be able to implement these systems in health care services and they will help to reduce not just the amount of infections but as well the number of people that die due to acquisition of multidrug resistance bacteria. This will also slow the increase in antibiotic resistance, the number of nosocomial acquire infections and potentially save millions of dollars a year.