Someone order 140 pounds of upper body strength? That's the first time we were in the shower since our honeymoon. And this time, no tears. Perhaps an attic shall I seek. It's Sunday, but screw it — juice box time. Please refrain from discussing or engaging in any sort of interoffice [bleep] or [bleep] or finger[bleep] or [bleep]sting or [bleep] or even [bleep]. Whenever she'd change clothes, she'd make me wait on the balcony until zip-up, and yet anything goes at bath time. Heart attack never stopped old Big Bear. I didn't even know we were calling him Big Bear. We never had the chance to. You can always tell a Milford man. This objectification of women has to stop. It's just Mom and whores. They frame my junk. You're losing blood, aren't you? Gob: Probably, my socks are wet. Heart attack never stopped old Big Bear. I didn't even know we were calling him Big Bear. We never had the chance to. Stop licking my hand, you horse's ass. Go ahead, touch the cornballer. Well, OK, have sex with this girl. Right now. Get in there, have some sex with her. It's ok. You be with Yam. You stay on top of her, Buddy. Don't be afraid to ride her. Hard. A Colombian cartel that WON'T kidnap and kill you. Ah coodle doodle doo, ah coodle doodle doo. Aren't you the sweetest thing, spending time with what's left of your uncle. I guess you can say I'm buy-curious. She's not 'that Mexican', Mom. She's my Mexican. And she's Colombian or something. Are you sure this isn't her sister? Mrs Veal: What a lovely thing to say. Michael: That's an awful thing to say. What's gotten into you? Have you been eating cheese?  Hahahahah! Hey, it was one night of wild passion! And yet you didn't notice her body? I like to look in the mirror. Saw this on the highway and almost blue myself.  Hop on? One of the guys told me to take my head out of my BOTTOM and get back to work…my BOTTOM! Hahahaha. Suddenly playing with yourself is a scholarly pursuit? Michael was concerned that he was caught in a lie about his family. The family was concerned that they were being confronted by a woman they had clubbed, drugged, and left on a bench. They don't appreciate him. It's his glasses… they make him look like a lizard. Plus he's self-conscious. She's not 'that Mexican', Mom. She's my Mexican. And she's Colombian or something. I know what an erection feels like, Michael. It's as Ann as the nose on plain's face. I'll have a vodka rocks. (Mom, it's breakfast time.) And a piece of toast. Wine only turns to alcohol if you let it sit. No, I was ashamed to be SEEN with you. I like being with you. Hey, maybe you could pop a tent outside with your cousin Maeby… it'd be a good chance to rub off on her. Daddy horny, Michael. If you're suggesting I play favorites, you're wrong. I love all of my children equally. I don't care for Gob. The only person that gets Lucille this excited is Gene. That's so you can videotape it when they put you in a naked pyramid and point to your Charlie Browns. I figured out a way to make money while I'm working! Up yours, granny! You couldn't handle it! And guess what else is back. [slow wink] My breakfast? My friskiness. Mama horny Michael. 