Neurons in the primary auditory cortex are tuned to the intensity and specific frequencies of sounds, but the synaptic mechanisms underlying this tuning remain uncertain. Inhibition seems to have a functional role in the formation of cortical receptive fields, because stimuli often suppress similar or neighbouring responses, and pharmacological blockade of inhibition broadens tuning curves. Here we use whole-cell recordings in vivo to disentangle the roles of excitatory and inhibitory activity in the tone-evoked responses of single neurons in the auditory cortex. The excitatory and inhibitory receptive fields cover almost exactly the same areas, in contrast to the predictions of classical lateral inhibition models. Thus, although inhibition is typically as strong as excitation, it is not necessary to establish tuning, even in the receptive field surround. However, inhibition and excitation occurred in a precise and stereotyped temporal sequence: an initial barrage of excitatory input was rapidly quenched by inhibition, truncating the spiking response within a few (1–4) milliseconds. Balanced inhibition might thus serve to increase the temporal precision and thereby reduce the randomness of cortical operation, rather than to increase noise as has been proposed previously.Receptive fields are shaped by the interaction of excitation and inhibition. In the auditory cortex, indirect measurements of this interaction by extracellular methods have suggested that it follows a classic organization—lateral inhibition—in which stimulation in the receptive field centre elicits excitation, and stimulation in the surround elicits inhibition. Here we have used in vivo whole-cell patch-clamp methods to test that model directly by measuring synaptic inputs evoked by pure tones in rat auditory cortical neurons (Fig. 1). For a subset of neurons (31/62), we improved the isolation of synaptic conductances by blocking action potentials with the fast sodium-channel blocker QX-314.Tone-evoked synaptic conductance changes were large (Fig. 1c), comparable in magnitude to the largest conductance changes elicited by visual stimulation in area V1 neurons. The true conductances were almost certainly higher than the values presented here, because voltage escape at the subsynaptic membrane due to electrotonic effects (space-clamp errors) causes an underestimation of synaptic conductances (see Supplementary Information). We decomposed the conductances into their underlying excitatory and inhibitory components (see Supplementary Methods). The inhibitory conductance was typically as large as the excitatory conductance, which is consistent with the presence of shunting inhibition. Each component followed approximately the same time course as the overall conductance waveform, showing a shortlatency rise followed by a slower decay. Excitation evoked a transient spiking response (consisting of typically one or at most a few spikes; Fig. 1d) before being quenched by inhibition after a few milliseconds.The total synaptic conductance was tuned for sound frequency (Fig. 2). The excitatory and inhibitory components were also tuned; moreover, they were co-tuned, showing approximately the same dependence on stimulus parameters in a given cell (Fig. 2a–d). Tuning of spiking responses was narrower than that of conductances or membrane potential (Fig. 3c), which is consistent with findings in auditory and other cortical regions. Co-tuning differs from classical lateral inhibition, because excitation was at least as broadly tuned as inhibition, and sometimes more so; some surround stimuli elicited a purely excitatory response, whereas pure inhibition was never observed (Fig. 3a). The co-tuning we observed is therefore different from the organization described in some simple cells in primary visual cortex, in which excitation and inhibition can each be elicited in isolation within discrete spatial subregions, but is reminiscent of other simple cells in which excitation and inhibition are evoked together from each subregion.Because inhibition had the same tuning as excitation, the tuning of the excitatory component alone would, in the absence of timing, be sufficient to establish a neuron’s dependence on frequency. Although co-tuned inhibition sharpens tuning, this effect is equivalent to that of any untuned decrease in excitability, such as an increase in spike threshold. By means of this ‘iceberg effect,’ inhibition (shunting or otherwise) determines how much of the iceberg is suprathreshold but does not affect the shape of the iceberg itself (Fig. 3b); our results are therefore consistent with the finding that pharmacological blockade of inhibition broadens frequency tuning. In this regard, frequency tuning in auditory cortex is similar to orientation tuning in some simple cells in primary visual cortex, which is sharpened by inhibition but which arises mainly through the convergence of thalamocortical inputs. In contrast, orientation selectivity in other visual cortical neurons arises through a diversity of synaptic mechanisms and can be influenced by recurrent cortical circuitry.Two-tone suppression, in which one tone modifies (usually suppresses) the response to a later tone, has been interpreted as evidence of lateral inhibition in auditory cortical neurons. Although our observations can explain how tuning is sharpened without lateral inhibition, they cannot by themselves account for two-tone suppression, which can last hundreds of milliseconds— longer than the inhibitory conductances we recorded (but see ref. 9). These suppressive effects might therefore be inherited from presynaptic neurons, or they might involve other mechanisms such as short-term synaptic plasticity.Because inhibition did not seem to be essential to frequency tuning, we wondered whether it was involved in some form of gain control, perhaps resulting from the relatively loud (65 dB sound pressure level (SPL)) stimuli that we presented. We therefore tested a wide range of different stimulus intensities (5–65 dB SPL). However, we found that although total synaptic conductances were indeed tuned for sound intensity, the balance of excitation to inhibition remained fixed as intensity varied (Fig. 2b, d). Thus, co-tuning was a general feature of auditory cortical responses to simple tones across a wide range of frequencies and intensities.Tuning for sound intensity (that is, a non-monotonic response to increasing intensity) has been proposed to result from lateral inhibition, which would predict that louder sounds should elicit stronger inhibition. Alternatively, intensity tuning might result from an increase in total input conductance, in which case louder sounds should elicit a larger total conductance change. However, neither prediction was satisified; we found non-monotonicity in both excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductances (Fig. 2b, d) underlying the response for all non-monotonic neurons, indicating that non-monotonicity was inherited from synaptic inputs. These observations are consistent with the finding that non-monotonic cortical cells are not converted into monotonic cells by inhibitory blockade.Because inhibition does not seem essential to either frequency or intensity tuning, what is its role? One key function of inhibition might be to sculpt the time course of tone-evoked responses. Excitation and inhibition appeared in a remarkably precise and stereotyped temporal sequence (Fig. 4): inhibition typically followed excitation after a brief delay (Fig. 4b). This sequence is consistent with that seen after electrical stimulation of the medial geniculate body. In most cells this delay was independent of both frequency and intensity (Fig. 4c, f, g), indicating that relative timing did not usually have a function in frequency or intensity tuning. The delay was stereotyped in the range of 1–4 ms (Fig. 4e; the mean delay was 2.4 ^ 3.6 ms, for n ? 50 stimulus conditions in 17 cells) even though the latency to the onset of excitation varied, suggesting that inhibition was locked to the excitation rather than to the stimulus itself. Because the period between the onset of excitation and inhibition was short, only a brief window was available for integrating excitatory synaptic inputs. Spikes were elicited only during this brief excitatory window (Figs 1d and 3c). Thus, inhibition acts to enforce the transient, often binary, nature of stimulus-evoked responses in auditory cortex.In a minority of cells (2 of 31, or 6%) the delay between excitation and inhibition was tuned for tone frequency (Fig. 4d). In these neurons the maximal depolarization corresponded not to the largest conductance but rather to the longest delay (and the least inhibition). Thus, in a fraction of neurons, timing might have a function in tuning. However, because we did not record spiking responses for these neurons, it is unclear whether these longer delays give rise to sustained firing here or in neurons driven by frequency-modulated sweeps, in which such long and stimulus-dependent delays have also been reported.Although sensory stimuli elicit both excitation and inhibition in auditory and other sensory systems, the consistently short and stereotyped delay we observed between excitation and inhibition, and its relationship to transient spiking, have not previously been reported. In contrast, long and variable delays have been proposed to underlie sweep selectivity in auditory cortex. This difference between short, sterotyped delays and long, variable delays might be due to the differences in stimuli (tones as opposed to sweeps), suggesting that excitatory–inhibitory delays might have different functional roles in shaping the responses to different classes of sounds. Similarly, excitation and inhibition in some simple cells of the primary visual cortex seem to have discrete subregions in space, yet are co-tuned for orientation.A balance between excitation and inhibition has previously been proposed to account for the apparently random firing of cortical neurons by producing large random fluctuations in the membrane potential. In such models, however, it is only the average rate of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials that is balanced; the individual events occur at random times, like raindrops. By contrast, the tight coordination we observed reflects a more precise control of cortical circuitry, unlikely to arise from random and independent synaptic activity arriving at a uniform rate. Moreover, the rapid quenching of excitation by inhibition limits the window available for temporal summation, enabling neurons to behave as coincidence detectors and thereby increasing temporal precision.We illustrate this distinction by using a simple integrate-and-fire model (Fig. 5). Balanced but delayed inhibition decreased the trialto-trial jitter in output spike times compared with the jitter in the input spike times (from 1 ms to 0.6 ms; Fig. 5a), whereas excitation and inhibition that were balanced on average instead increased spike time jitter (from 1 ms to 4.7 ms; Fig. 5b). In both of these models, excitation and inhibition are balanced, but in a different sense: a continuing balance produces irregular firing (similar to responses observed in visual cortex, which motivate such models), whereas the transient and temporally offset balance we have observed produces highly transient spiking responses (Figs 1d and 3c), which is consistent with previous findings in auditory cortex. Thus our data suggest that balanced inhibition can sharpen neural responses in time, reducing rather than increasing the randomness of cortical operation.