In the preceding paper (Hodgkin, Huxley & Katz, 1952) we gave a general description of the time course of the current which flows through the membrane of the squid giant axon when the potential difference across the membrane is suddenly changed from its resting value, and held at the new level by a feed-back circuit ('voltage clamp' procedure). This article is chiefly concerned with the identity of the ions which carry the various phases of the membrane current.One of the most striking features of the records of membrane current obtained under these conditions was that when the membrane potential was lowered from its resting value by an amount between about 10 and 100 mV. the initial current (after completion of the quick pulse through the membrane capacity) was in the inward direction, that is to say, the reverse of the direction of the current which the same voltage change would have caused to flow in an ohmic resistance. The inward current was of the right order of magnitude, and occurred over the right range of membrane potentials, to be the current responsible for charging the membrane capacity during the rising phase of an action potential. This suggested that the phase of inward current in the voltage clamp records might be carried by sodium ions, since there is much evidence (reviewed by Hodgkin, 1951) that the rising phase of the action potential is caused by the entry of these ions, moving under the influence of concentration and potential differences. To investigate this possibility, we carried out voltage clamp runs with the axon surrounded by solutions with reduced sodium concentration. Choline was used as an inert cation since replacement of sodium with this ion makes the squid axon completely inexcitable, but does not reduce the resting potential (Hodgkin & Katz, 1949; Hodgkin, Huxley & Katz, 1949).METHODThe apparatus and experimental procedure are fully described in the preceding paper (Hodgkin et al. 1952). 'Uncompensated feed-back' was employed. Sea water was used as a normal solution. Sodium-deficient solutions were made by mixing sea water in varying proportions with isotonic 'choline sea water' of the following composition: Ion g. ions/kg. H20 Ion g. ions/kg. H.0 Choline+ 484 Mg++ 54 K+ 10 C1- 621 Ca++ 11 HCO0 3 The mixtures are referred to by their sodium content, expressed as a percentage of that in sea water (30% Na sea water, etc.).RESULTSVoUage claMPs in sodium-free solution Fig. 1 shows the main differences between voltage clamp records taken with the axon surrounded by sea water, and by a sodium-free solution. Each record gives the current which crossed the membrane when it was depolarized by 65 mV. After the top record was made, the sea water surrounding the axon was replaced by choline sea water, and the middle record was taken. The fluid was again changed to sea water, and the bottom record taken. The amplifier gain was the same in all three records, but a given deflexion represents a smaller current in the choline solution, since the current was detected by the potential drop along a channel filled with the fluid which surrounded the axon, and the specific resistance of the choline sea water was about 23 % higher than that of ordinary sea water.The most important features shown in Fig. 1 are the following: (1) When the external sodium concentration was reduced to zero, the inward current disappeared and was replaced by an early hump in the outward current. i(2) The late outward current was only slightly altered, the steady level being 15-20 % less in the sodium-free solution. (3) The changes were reversed when sea water was replaced. The currents are slightly smaller in the bottom record than in the top one, but the change is not attributable to an action of the choline since a similar drop occurred when an axon was kept in sea water for an equal length of time.A series of similar records with different strengths of depolarization is shown in Fig. 2. The features described in connexion with Fig. 1 are seen at all strengths between -28 and -84 mV. At the weakest depolarization (-14 mV.) the early phase of outward current in the sodium-free record is too small to be detected. At the highest strengths the early current is outward even in sea water, and is then increased in the sodium-free solution.These results are in qualitative agreement with the hypothesis that the inward current is carried by sodium ions which, as an early result of the decrease in membrane potential, are permitted to cross the membrane in both directions under a driving force which is the resultant of the effects of the concentration difference and the electrical potential difference across the membrane. When the axon is in sea water, the concentration of sodium outside the membrane [Na]0 is 5-10 times greater than that inside, [Na]j. This tends to make the inward flux exceed the outward. The electrical potential difference E also helps the inward and hinders the outward flux so long as it is positive, i.e. in the same direction as the resting potential. The net current carried by the positive charge of the sodium ions is therefore inward unless the depolarization is strong enough to bring E to a sufficiently large negative value to overcome the effect of the concentration difference. The critical value of E at which the fluxes are equal, and the net sodium current is therefore zero, will be called the 'sodium potential', ENa. Its value should be given by the Nernst equation.With values of E more negative than this, the net sodium flux is outward, causing the early phase of the outward current seen in the lowest record of the first and third columns of Fig. 2, where the axon was in sea water and was depolarized by 112 mV. A family of voltage clamp records which shows particularly well this transition from an initial rise to an initial fall as the strength of depolarization is increased is reproduced as Fig. 14 of the preceding paper. When the axon is placed in a sodium-free medium, such as the 'choline sea water', there can be no inward flux of sodium, and the sodium current must always be outward. This will account for the early hump on the outward current which is seen at all but the lowest strength of depolarization in the centre column of Fig. 2.Voltage clamps with reduced sodium concentrationThe results of reducing the sodium concentration to 30 and 10% of the value in sea water are shown in Figs. 3 and 4 respectively. These figures do not show actual records of current through the membrane. The curves, are graphs of ionic current against time, obtained by subtracting the current through the capacity from the recorded total current. The initial surge in an anodal record was assumed to consist only of capacity current, and the capacity current at other strengths was estimated by scaling this in proportion to the amplitude of the applied voltage change.As would be expected, the results are intermediate between those shown in Fig. 2 for an axon in sea water and in choline sea water. Inward current is present, but only over a range of membrane potentials which decreases with the sodium concentration, and within that range, the strength of the current is reduced. A definite sodium potential still exists beyond which the early hump of ionic current is outward, but the strength of depolarization required to reach it decreases with the sodium concentration. Thus, in the first column of Fig. 3, with the axon in 30 % sodium sea water, the sodium potential is almost exactly reached by a depolarization of 79 mV. In the second column, with sea water surrounding the axon, the sodium potential is just exceeded by a depolarization of 108 mV. In column 3, after re-introducing 30 % sodium sea water, the sodium potential is slightly exceeded by a depolarization of 79 mV. Similarly, in Fig. 4, the sodium potentials are almost exactly reached by depolarizations of 105, 49 and 98 mV. in the three columns, the axon being in sea water, 10 % sodium sea water and sea water respectively. The sequence of changes in the form of the curves as the sodium potential is passed is remarkably similar in all cases.The external sodium concentration and the 'sodium potential'Estimation of the 'sodium potential' in solutions with different sodium concentrations is of particular importance because it leads to a quantitative test of our hypothesis. Equation (1) gives the sodium potential in sea water (ENa), and the corresponding quantity (ENa) when the external sodium concentration is reduced to [Na]' is given by E'Na = RT/Floge[Na]i/[Na]o’. Each term in this equation can be determined experimentally, and data were obtained in four experiments on two axons. The results are given in Table 1, where the observed shift in sodium potential is compared with that predicted from the change in sodium concentration by Equation (3). It will be TABLE 1. Comparison of observed and theoretical change in sodium potential when the fluid surrounding an axon is changed from sea water to a low sodium solution. Observed change: EN.=(VN - VN) + (E, - E,); theoretical change = log [Na]. Sodium potential shift Axon Temp. [Na]--- VNN (Er - Er) Observed Theoretical no. (O C.) [Na]0 (mV.) (mV.) (mV.) (mV.) (mV.) 20 6-3 03 -105 -78 +3 +30 +28-9 20 6*3 0.1 -96 -45 +4 +55 +55-3 21 8-5 01 -100 -48 +4 +56 +55-6 21 8*5 0.1 -95 -45 +4 +54 +55-6 seen that there is good agreement, providing strong evidence that the early rise or fall in the recorded ionic current is carried by sodium ions, moving under the influence of their concentration difference and of the electric potential difference across the membrane. Details of the estimation of the quantities which enter into Equation (3) are given in the following paragraphs.Na AND K CURRENTS IN NERVE MEMBRANEChange in resting potential: Experiments with ordinary capillary internal electrodes showed that the resting potential increased on the average by 4 mV. when the sea water surrounding the axon was replaced by choline sea water (a correction of 1-5 mV. for junction potentials in the extemal solutions js included in this figure). With intermediate sodium concentrations, the change in resting potential was assumed to be proportional to the change in sodium concentration. For instance, the resting potential in 30 % sodium sea water was taken as 2-8 mV. higher than that in sea water. slow change in condition of axon. When an axon is kept in sea water, its sodium content rises (Steinbach & Spiegelman, 1943; Keynes & Lewis, 1951) and its resting potential falls. Both of these effects bring E, and ENa closer together, Timinishing the absolute magnitude of VN. In comparing Vw. in two solutions, it was therefore necessary to determine VN. first in one solution, then in the other and finally in the first solution again. The second value of VN. was then compared with the mean of the first and third.The internal sodium concentration and the sodium potentialIn freshly mounted fibres the average difference between the sodium potential and the resting potential was found to be - 109 mV. (ten axons with a range of -95 to -119 mV. at an average temperature of 8° C.). The average resting potential in these fibres was 56 mV. when measured with a microelectrode containing sea water. By the time the sodium potential was measured the resting potential had probably declined by a few millivolts and may be taken as 50 mV. Allowing 10-15 mV. for the junction potential between sea water and axoplasm (Curtis & Cole, 1942; Hodgkin & Katz, 1949) this gives an absolute resting potential of 60-65 mV. The absolute value of the sodium potential would then be -45 to -50 mV. The sodium concentration in sea water is about 460 m.mol./kg. H20 (Webb, 1939, 1940) so that the internal concentration of sodium would have to be 60-70 m.mol./kg. H20 in order to satisfy Equation 1. This seems to be a very reasonable estimate since the sodium concentration in freshly dissected axons is about 50 m.mol./kg. H20 while that in axons kept for 2 or 3 hr. is about 100 m.mol./kg. H120 (Steinbach &Spiegelman, 1943; Keynes & Lewis, 1951; Manery, 1939, for fraction of water in axoplasm).Outward currents at long timesSo far, this paper has been concerned with the earliest phases of the membrane current that flows during a voltage clamp. The only current which has the opposite sign from the applied voltage pulse is the inward current which occurs over a certain range of depolarizations when the surrounding medium contains sodium ions. This inward current is always transient, passing over into outward current after a time which depends on the strength of depolarization and on the temperature. The current at long times resembles that in an ohmic resistance in having the same sign as the applied voltage change, but differs in that the outward current due to depolarization rises with a delay to a density which may be 50-100 times greater than that associated with a similar increase in membrane potential. Figs. 1-3 show that this late current is not greatly affected by the concentration of sodium in the fluid surrounding the axon.An outward current which arises with a delay after a fall in the membrane potential is clearly what is required in order to explain the falling phase of the action potential. The outward currents reached in a voltage clamp may con- (siderably exceed the maximum which occurs in an action potential; this may well be because the duration of an action potential is not sufficient to allow the outward current to reach its maximum value. These facts suggest that the outward current associated with prolonged depolarization is the same current which causes the falling phase of the action potential. The evidence (reviewed by Hodgkin, 1951) that the latter is caused by potassium ions leaving the axon is therefore a suggestion that the former is also carried by potassium ions. Direct evidence that such long-continued and outwardly directed membrane currents are carried by potassium ions has now been obtained in Sepia axons by a tracer technique (unpublished experiments). We shall therefore assume that this delayed outward current is carried by potassium ions, and we shall refer to it as 'potassium current', IK. Since it is outward, it is not appreciably affected by the external potassium concentration, and evidence for or against potassium being the carrier cannot easily be obtained by means of experiments analogous to those which have just been described with altered external sodium concentration.IE in sea water and choline. As has been mentioned, the later part of the current record during a constant depolarization is much the same whether the axon is surrounded by sea water or by one of the solutions with reduced sodium concentration. There are, however, certain differences. For a given strength of depolarization, the maximum outward current is smaller by some 10 or 20% in the low-sodium solution, and at the higher strengths where the outward current is not fully maintained, the maximum occurs earlier in the low-sodium solution. Part of the difference in amplitude is explained by the difference of resting potential. Since the resting potential is greater in the low-sodium medium, a higher strength of depolarization is needed to reach a given membrane potential during the voltage clamp. This difference can be allowed for by interpolation between the actual strengths employed in one of the solutions. In most cases, this procedure did not entirely remove the difference between the amplitudes. There are, however, two other effects which are likely to contribute. In the first place, the effect of not using 'compensated feed-back' is probably greater in the low-sodium solution (see preceding paper, p. 445). This further reduces the amplitude of the voltage change which actually occurs across the membrane. In the second place, the fact that the current reached its maximum earlier suggests that '-polarization' (preceding paper, p. 445) had a greater effect in the low-sodium solution. We do not know enough about either of these effects to estimate the amount by which they may have reduced the potassium current. It does seem at least possible that they account for the whole of the discrepancy, and we therefore assume provisionally that substituting choline sea water for sea water has no direct effect on the potassium current.SUMMARY1. The effect of sodium ions on the current through the membrane of the giant axon of Loltigo was investigated by the 'voltage-clamp ' method.2. The initial phase of inward current, normally associated with depolarizations of 10-100 mV., was reversed in sign by replacing the sodium in the external medium with choline.3. Provided that sodium ions were present in the external medium it was possible to find a critical potential above which the initial phase of ionic current was inward and below which it was outward. This potential was normally reached by a depolarization of 110 mV., and varied with external sodium concentration in the same way as the potential of a sodium electrode.4. These results support the view that depolarization leads to a rapid increase in permeability which allows sodium ions to move in either direction through the membrane. These movements carry the initial phase of ionic current, which may be inward or outward, according to the difference between the sodium concentration and the electrical potential of the inside and outside of the fibre.5. The delayed outward current associated with prolonged depolarization was little affected by replacing .sodium ions with choline ions. Reasons are given for supposing that this component of the current is largely carried by potassium ions.6. By making certain simple assumptions it is possible to resolve the total *ionic current into sodium and potassium currents. The time course of the -sodium or potassium permeability when the axon is held in the depolarized condition is found by using conductance as a measure of permeability.7. It is shown that the sodium conductance rises rapidly to a maximum and then declines along an approximately exponential curve. The potassium conductance rises more slowly along an S-shaped curve and is maintained at a high level for long periods of time. The maximum sodium and potassium conductances were normally of the order of 30 m.mho/cm.2 at a depolarization of 100 mV.8. The relation between sodium concentration and sodium current agrees with a theoretical equation based on the assumption that ions cross the membrane independently of one another.