Introduction
Lithium diisopropylamide (LDA) is prominent in organic synthesis. In a comprehensive survey of the frequency that reagents were used in approximately 500 natural product syntheses, LDA came out number one. This prevalence is one of the two reasons why we have focused on understanding the structure-reactivity relationships in LDA-mediated reactions. The other is that LDA offers a highly tractable template with which to study the influence of aggregation and solvation on organolithium reaction mechanisms. The numerous synthetic applications of LDA combine with its complex coordination chemistry to produce considerable mechanistic variations.
To understand the source of the complexity—if not the complexity itself—we present Scheme 1, which summarizes the deaggregation of disolvated LDA dimer 1 to trisolvated monomer 6. For many reactions, typically those that are conveniently monitored between 0 °C and ?60 °C, the aggregates equilibrate very quickly compared to the rate of reaction being studied. Under conditions of fully established equilibria, all aggregates are available to react with the substrate, and studies have shown that many do. During the course of our research we began to believe that a coherent picture of reactivity had emerged, which prompted us to summarize the results in a review.
Recent rate studies, however, began to uncover aberrant behaviors that failed to follow conventional patterns. For example, during studies of imine metalations in which the relative reactivities spanned an approximate 60,000-fold range, the most reactive imine required that the reaction temperature be reduced to ?78 °C (eq 1).4 This was the first time that we had investigated the kinetics of an LDA-mediated metalation at ?78 °C, and something odd happened: the loss of imine failed to follow a normal (first-order) decay, instead displaying a persistent linearity over the first two half lives. We noted but largely ignored this observation.4 Soon thereafter, odd substrate decays began appearing in disparate reactions including a host of ortholithiations5,6,7 (such as eqs 2 and 3)8 and even 1,4-additions of LDA to unsaturated esters (eq 4).9 All shared two common traits: they were carried out using LDA in tetrahydrofuran (THF) at ?78 °C, and they displayed hypersensitivities to traces of LiCl (as little as 1.0 ppm).
Mechanistic studies indicated that LDA aggregate exchanges were dictating the reaction rate,10 causing the emerging mechanistic picture to be quite vexing. The odd linear decays observed for ortholithiations of aryl carbamates (eq 2)—apparent zeroth-order substrate dependencies consistent with ratelimiting deaggregation of LDA dimer—were traced instead to virulent autocatalysis and the intervention of highly reactive mixed aggregates.6 Unusual time-dependent changes in the concentration of LDA-ArLi mixed dimers attested to non-equilibrium conditions. The ortholithiation in eq 3 was found to be both autocatalyzed11,12 and LiCl catalyzed, but the rate-limiting step of the uncatalyzed metalation involved rate-limiting deaggregation—a true zeroth-order substrate dependence—via a disolvated-dimer-based transition structure. Post-rate-limiting lithiation was shown to occur via a fleeting dimer-based rather than a monomer-based intermediate. Both autocatalysis and LiCl catalysis, by contrast, were shown to divert the reaction through a monomer-based mechanism. Seemingly analogous linear decays for 1,4-additions of LDA to unsaturated esters (eq 4) also involved a rate-limiting deaggregation of LDA, but it was found to occur via a trisolvated-dimer-based transition structure rather than via a disolvated dimer seen for ortholithiation.9 Different substrates were reacting via different rate-limiting deaggregations! The post-rate-limiting 1,4-additions were shown to proceed via an LDA-monomer-based pathway. Highly muted autocatalysis and dramatic catalysis by LiCl were traced explicitly to catalyzed deaggregation to the same LDA monomer.13
Although in isolation the case studies are logical, considered together they paint a chaotic mechanistic picture. We began to realize that a complete understanding of LDA-mediated reactions under these highly prevalent conditions—LDA/THF/?78 °C—demand a more general and comprehensive understanding of LDA deaggregation. Although aggregation dynamics have received some attention, detailed analyses of organolithium deaggregations are absent.14
In this paper computational studies show that the intermediates in Scheme 1 are legitimate minima en route from the resting state of LDA (1)15 to fleeting trisolvated monomer 6. Moreover, conformational effects on the stabilities of 1–6 as well as on the activation barriers to exchange are surprising in both detail and implication.16

Results
General
All structures were computed using diisopropylamido groups and THF ligands without structural approximations. Density functional theory (DFT) and MP2 calculations were performed with the Gaussian 09 package using Gaussview 5.0 and WebMO as a graphical user interface.17 Geometry optimizations and frequency calculations were performed at the B3LYP level of theory using the 6–31G(d) and 6–31+G(d) Pople basis sets. Free energies were calculated from an MP2-derived single-point energy [6–31G(d) basis set] and a B3LYP-derived thermal correction [6–31G(d)] at 195 K (?78 °C) and 1 atm.18 (MP2 corrections seem to provide superior correlations of theory and experiment, especially for the most highly solvated forms of LDA.)19 Basis set superposition errors (BSSE)20 were corrected using the counterpoise method21to test for energy errors arising from incomplete basis sets. Geometries that are particularly sensitive to BSSE will be discussed. Transition structures were confirmed by the existence of a single imaginary frequency, and intrinsic reaction coordinate (IRC) calculations22 confirm the connection with specific minima. The energy surface describing LDA deaggregation is summarized in Scheme 2.
Minima
Moving from left to right in Scheme 2 corresponds to the stepwise conversion of known disolvated dimer115 (and related less symmetric cyclic dimers) through open dimers to give monomers as indicated in grey scale along the reaction coordinate (x axis). The key minima in Scheme 2 correspond to structures 1–6 in Scheme 1. Bridged dimer 7 and disolvated monomer 8 precede minima corresponding to monomer 6. The shaded regions correspond to conformational ensembles of di- and trisolvated open dimers 4 and 5.23Energy levels inside the shaded region correspond to distinct conformers. The lines illustrate connections between transition structures and specific conformational isomers of minima. Minima 2 and 3 are linked directly because the transformation is computed to be barrierless.
The steric demands and chirality of the isopropyl group render the potential energy surface of LDA aggregation and solvation rich in detail. Diisopropylamido moieties display two conformational minima corresponding to mirror images (eq 5).24 Consequently, LDA dimers can exist as both homochiral and heterochiral (meso) diastereomers. A number of comparisons, however, show that in the open dimers and open dimer-based transition structures, the two diisopropylamido moieties do not communicate, resulting in comparable energies. The energies in Scheme 2 derive from the homochiral form. In the cyclic dimers (1, 2, and 3), the homochiral form is preferred over the heterochiral (meso) form by ≈1 kcal/mol. The computed structure of 1 matches the crystal structure.
Two spatial relationships are prominent in open dimers. By sighting along the axis defined by the two nitrogen atoms (dashed line in Scheme 3), we loosely define a pseudo dihedral angle (?CC) to describe conformational isomerism arising from the rotational orientations of the two diisopropylamido moieties. These orientations are most easily envisioned by imagining rotation about the N–Li bond of the terminal diisopropylamido group. We define a second, standard dihedral angle (?LiO) that describes the THF orientations as defined by rotation about the N–Li bond to the terminal lithium. The open dimers are organized by dihedral angles ?CC and ?LiO in supporting information. Other minor conformational adjustments, such as the rotations about the individual THF ligands, coincide with these primary conformational changes.
We sampled the conformers of disolvated open dimers 4 by incrementally varying ?CC. Structures 4a–4e (Scheme 4) are representative of the eight conformers available through a 180° rotation, and they span a 2–3 kcal/mol range. (The three omitted do not include any exceptional structural features.) All conformers fall within an approximate 90° rotation. The conversion of 4e to 4a to complete the cycle requires an approximate 90° rotation of the diisopropylamido group, yet no minima are detectable. Changes in ?CC are accompanied by changes in ?LiO corresponding to seemingly fluid rotations about the THF-bearing N–Li bond that loosely approximate three orientations. We can find no simple (predictable) relationship between ?CC and ?LiO.

Analogous conformers are observed for trisolvated open dimers (Scheme 5), yet gearing arising from the high steric demands seems to allow for fewer minima at larger increments of ?CC. The relative energies of the five conformers span an 8 kcal/mol range. All show a reduction of the N–Li–N angle to ≈165° owing to solvation of the internal lithium. The conformers fit into three groups: (1) 5a is unique in that the THF ligand on the interior lithium is orthogonal relative to the orientation in the other four conformers. Conformers 5b and 5c show evidence of diisopropylamido distortion and reduction of the Li–N–Li angle when compared with the disolvates that we attribute to buttressing. Conformers 5d and 5e seem most akin to the disolvated dimers in Scheme 4.

Transition Structures
Transition structures 9–15 connect select minima; dashed lines indicate bonds being cleaved. The transition structures are described by two fundamentally different imaginary vibrational modes: (1) Li–O stretching during THF dissociation/association, and (2) N–Li stretching during lithium amide bond formation/cleavage. Both modes are characterized by low absolute values in imaginary frequencies ranging from 18 to 49 cm?1. The protocols required for locating transition structures are instructive. The standard method for locating transition structures was to perform a relaxed potential energy scan by incrementally stretching the bond of interest. For example, incrementally increasing the Li–O distance from 2.0 Å by steps of 0.1 Å raised the energy continuously until it dropped at 2.8 Å. Geometries were optimized at each point along the surface with the reaction coordinate describing the Li–O distance. The optimized geometry with rLi–O = 2.8 Å was a good initial guess for a transition state optimization.
It became evident that only specific conformers could exit the trisolvated open dimer ensemble (Scheme 2). Whereas one conformer of 5 led to THF dissociation (11), another led to closed dimer-formation (12), and two others led to fragmentation (13 and 14). The importance of sampling conformational space cannot be overstated. Transition structure 11 proved particularly difficult to locate but offered interesting insights. Incrementally stretching the Li–O bond afforded no saddle points starting from any of the four lowest-energy trisolvated open dimer conformers akin to 5. Only by scanning from the highest-energy conformer could 11 finally be located. Incidentally, the highest-energy conformer connecting to 11 was not located by a rational sampling of all trisolvated open dimer conformers. A reverse IRC calculation from 13 led to this new geometry, which allowed us to locate 11; serendipity played a big role. The strategy of palpating forward and backward along the reaction coordinate using output geometries as the input for a new search proved an important strategy for locating transition structures.
Transition structures corresponding to N–Li stretching (10, 12, and 13) were located using the scanning protocol. Again, the conformational geometry proved critical. Attempts to find transition structures describing the interconversion of conformers within the open dimer ensembles were unsuccessful, presumably owing to exceedingly low absolute values in the imaginary frequency. Casual inspection of the minima, however, suggests that their interconversion occurs via low energy barriers.
Tetrasolvated open dimers
There is no experimental support for tetrasolvated-dimer-based deaggregations of LDA, but thanks in large part to prompts by a referee we examined the viability of tetrasolvated minima and transition structures as illustrated in Scheme 6. The energies dovetail with those in Scheme 2. Trisolvated open dimer 5 binds a THF at the external lithium (18) while trisolvate 16 binds THF at the internal lithium (19) both yielding tetrasolvated open dimer 20, albeit varying in conformational isomerism. Open dimer 20 then dissociates to two units of monomer 8 via transition structure 21 geometrically analogous to 13 and comparable in energy (22 kcal/mol).

Discussion
The experimental background presented in the introduction paints a chaotic mechanistic picture of a delicate balance between rate-limiting aggregation events and rate-limiting reaction with substrates. DFT computational studies of LDA deaggregation afforded the series of minima that are illustrated in Scheme 1and delineated in full detail with the accompanying transition structures in Scheme 2. The overall picture shows a series of fleeting intermediates and transition structures computed to be within an energy range commensurate with the activation energies of LDA-mediated metalations. The results for the di- and trisolvates reflect results stemming from detailed rate studies. In addition, we examined the role of tetrasolvate-based deaggregations, which are not (yet) experimentally documented (Scheme 6).
