AbstractWith the discovery of Dark Energy, ?DE, there is now a universal length scale, ?DE = c/(?DEG) 1/2 , associated with the universe that allows for an extension of the geodesic equations of motion. In this paper, we will study a specific class of such extensions, and show that contrary to expectations, they are not automatically ruled out by either theoretical considerations or experimental constraints. In particular, we show that while these extensions affect the motion of massive particles, the motion of massless particles are not changed; such phenomena as gravitational lensing remain unchanged. We also show that these extensions do not violate the equivalence principal, and that because ?DE = 14010800 820 Mpc, a specific choice of this extension can be made so that effects of this extension are not be measurable either from terrestrial experiments, or through observations of the motion of solar system bodies. A lower bound for the only parameter used in this extension is set. PACS 95.36.+x · 04.20.Cv · 04.25.-g IntroductionThe recent discovery of Dark Energy (see [1], [2] and references therein) has broadened our knowledge of the universe, and has demonstrated once again that it can hold surprises for us. This discovery has, most assuredly, also brought into sharp relief the degree of our understanding of the universe. In this paper, we will study one specific implication of this discovery: With the discovery of Dark Energy, ?DE, there is now a universal length scale, ?DE = c/(?DEG) 1/2 , 1 , 2 associated with the universe that allows for extensions of the geodesic equations of motion (GEOM). We find that contrary to expectations, these extensions are not automatically ruled out by theoretical considerations, nor are they ruled out by experimental constraints either through terrestrial experiments or through solar system tests of general relativity. Indeed, we show in this paper that one specific extension of the GEOM is a viable alternative to the GEOM, and we obtain a lower bound for the only free parameter used in its construction, a power-law exponent, ??. There are good theoretical and physical reasons for studying the range of extensions of the geodesic equations of motion that are allowed. Arguments for the use of the geodesic equations of motion to describe the motion of massive test particles in curved spacetime are based on various statements of the equivalence principle, and the principle of general covariance (see chapter 4 of [5]), along with arguments in favor of simplicity and aesthetics. Importantly, these arguments are made in addition to those made in favor of Einstein’s field equation. Namely, these is no unique way of deriving the geodesic equations of motion from the field equations. Indeed, in 1938 Einstein, Infield and Hoffman attempted to show that as a consequence of the field equations, massive test particles will travel along geodesics in the spacetime [6]. These attempts have continued to the present day [7], [8]. Extensions and modifications of the GEOM have been made before, of course. On the level of Newtonian dynamics, Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) [9] has been proposed as an alternate explanation of the galactic rotation curves. On the relativistic level, there has been recent efforts [10] to develop a general framework to study modifications to the GEOM in the weak field, linearized gravity limits. The major impetus for this work has been to describe a series of dynamical anomalies—the Pioneer anomaly (see [11] and [12]), the flyby anomaly [13], and the lengthening of the Astronomical Unit [14]—that have been observed at the Solar system scale. The focus of this paper is to establish the underlying theoretical framework that can be used to describe structures and dynamics at the galactic length scale and above. In a future paper [15], this framework will be applied to an analysis of the galactic rotation curves, and the impact that this extension has on phenomena at cosmological length scales will be studied. As such, we focus here on the Dark Energy energy length scale, and on how the existence of this scale allows for extensions of the GEOM. Indeed, we find that with this length scale, ?DE, extensions of the GEOM are not difficult to construct. The quotient c 2R/?DEG is dimensionless, and functionals of this quotient can easily be used to extend the GEOM. What is more relevant is whether or not the resultant equations of motion will be a physically viable alternative to the GEOM. As such we will be guided in our extension of the GEOM by the four conditions listed below. They are deliberately chosen to be conservative in scope, and thus stringent in their application. Somewhat surprisingly, we will show that there is at least one extension of the GEOM that satisfies all four. First, we require that the extension preserve the equivalence principle, which is one of the underlying principles on which general relativity is founded.In the following sections of the paper, we will explicitly see that this preservation is assured by the fact that ?DE is the same for all test particles. This universal nature of ?DE is crucial. While other length scales—say, the proton mass—could be used for the extension, the resultant equations of motion would depend on this mass. They could not then be applied to the motion of protons without explicitly violating the uniqueness of free fall condition. Second, we require that the extension not change the equations of motion for massless test particles; such particles must still follow the GEOM. All astronomical observations—of which gravitational lensing is playing an increasingly important role—are based on the motion of photons of various wavelengths. Modifications to the equations of motion for photons will require a reinterpretation of these observations, a daunting step not to be taken without good reason. We will show that by considering a class of extensions that is based on conformally scaling the rest mass of the test particle, we arrive at extended GEOMs that, on the one hand, will not change the motion of massless test particles, but will, on the other, change the motion of massive ones. Being conformal, the motion of photons will not be affected by this class of extensions, and they will still travel along null geodesics; phenomena such as gravitational lensing will remain unchanged. While in form this class of extensions resembles a scalar field theory that is non-minimally and nonlinearly coupled to the scalar curvature, R, such theories are constructed at the quantum level. Our extension of the GEOM is done at the classical, ~ = 0, level, with the scale of the coupling set by ?DE. The third condition involves the attempts [6], [7], [8] at proving that the GEOM are the unique consequence of the Einstein field equations (see also page 72 of [5]). These proofs would seem to rule out any physically relevant extension of the GEOM, and by necessity, our extension of the GEOM cannot be precluded by such proofs. That the extension is possible is because these proofs focus on the motion of test particles in regions where the Einstein tensor, Gµ? , vanishes. We will see that in these regions the extended GEOM reduce to the GEOM, and thus do not violate these proofs. Indeed, we will explicitly construct the energy-momentum tensor for an inviscid fluid of massive particles propagating under the extended GEOM.The fourth condition is the most stringent of the four. With the exception of the as-yet unexplained anomalies described above, we require that the extension of the GEOM not produce effects that are measurable either in terrestrial experiments, or through the motion of bodies in the solar system that have traditionally been used to test general relativity. While stringent, we will nevertheless show explicitly that a choice of extension can be made which satis- fies it. Physically, this choice is possible because at (7.21+0.83 ?0.84) x 10?30 g/cm3 [16], ?DE is orders of magnitude smaller than the density of matter, ?limit, either currently achievable in terrestrial experiments (where densities exceed 10?18 g/cm3 ), or present in the solar system (where the density of matter in Mercury’s orbit exceeds 10?23 g/cm3 ). Correspondingly, at 14010800 820 Mpc ?DE is more than three times larger than the observed size of the universe, and is orders of magnitude larger than the solar system. Nevertheless, we find that even though the disparity between the magnitude of ?DE and ?limit—or, equivalently, between ?DE and the size of the solar system—is large, a nonlinear function of c 2R/?DEG is needed in constructing the extension for its effects not to have already been seen in terrestrial experiments. The simplest of these extensions has only one free parameter, ??, a power-law exponent that determines the behavior of the function at densities both much larger than ?DE, and much smaller than it. Lower bounds for ?? are set by requiring that the extension does not produce observable effects in current terrestrial experiments. While it may be possible to apply the analysis in this paper to the explanation of Solar system anomalies such as the Pioneer anomaly, the focus of this research is on phenomenon at the galactic scale or longer. It is for this reason that we require our extension to be constrained only by experiments and observations that are currently well-understood, and for which the underlying physics is well-known. We leave to future work the question of whether or not our analysis can be applied to explaining the Pioneer and other Solarsystem-scale anomalies.Concluding RemarksWe have shown that because of the existence of a universal length scale, ?DE, it is now possible to construct an extension of the GEOM. This extension preserves the equivalence principal, does not change the motion of massless test particles, and does not produce effects that would be detectable in either terrestrial experiments, or through observing the motion of bodies in the solar system. Our extension of the GEOM is thus a physically viable alternative to the GEOM. The question remains as to whether these equations of motion have any physical relevance. In short, is anything gained by using this extension? Because ?DE = 14010800 820 Mpc, we would expect that any effects from the extended GEOM will become apparent at much longer length scales than those considered here. Indeed, given the size of ?DE the only reason why we would expect the extended GEOM to be relevant at all is because D is a nonlinear function of the energy-momentum tensor of ambient matter. This question of relevance will be addressed in a future paper [15] where the extended GEOM is applied to the motion of stars in the rotation curves of galaxies, and to the density of matter at cosmological length scales. These are the scales at which we expect the effects from the extension to come into play, and where its relevance can be assessed. Finally, as noted in [21], Eq. (19) can be solved in general to give an equation of motion for particles, v ??? vµ = ?µp/(? + p/c2 ), and we see that the presence of any pressure term in the energy-momentum tensor results in deviations from geodesic motion. Given that ?DE can also be used to construct a pressure, it is natural to ask whether the effects of the extended GEOM can be obtained through the introduction of an ad hoc pressure term in the energy-momentum tensor. Such an ad hoc term can only be introduced to the energy-momentum tensor for matter, however; for the reasons given in the introduction, the equations of motion for massless particles cannot be changed. In addition, because the behavior of any massive particle approaches that of a massless one in the ultrarelativistic limit, this ad hoc pressure term must be constructed so that irrespective of frame this term contributes a negligible amount to the energy of the particle in this limit. Moreover, even if such a construction can be accomplished at the ultrarelativistic limit, hurdles remain at the nonrelativistic limit. While it is possible to construct in the nonrelativistic limit an appropriate ad hoc pressure using ?DE and D, when the resultant equations of motion are applied to the same systems as the extended GEOM in [15], effects are predicted at the cosmological scale that either do not agree with experiment or are not physically reasonable. This occurs even though the pressure is chosen so that at galactic scales predicted effects will be in broad agreement with observations. For these reasons, it is doubtful that introducing ad hoc pressure term in place of the extended GEOM will be succussful.